Add Fortran presentation and exercises (#129)
kokkos/kokkos-tutorials: Content/Presentations/Fortran/KokkosTutorial_Fortran.tex

\input{KokkosTutorial_PreTitle}

\title{Kokkos-Fortran-Interop}

\input{KokkosTutorial_PostTitle}

\usepackage{minted}

\begin{document}

\begin{frame}
	\titlepage
\end{frame}

> \begin{frame}{Installation}

Reviewer: Should we make some comment that the tool is not really actively developed?

Author: No, the plan is to get the library back into shape.

Reviewer: Ok, that is interesting. Ok, we can keep it as it is.

Reviewer: Resloved

  \begin{itemize}
    \item Repository: \url{https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos-fortran-interop}
    \item Requirements:
      \begin{itemize}
        \item Kokkos 4.0 or newer
        \item C++17/Fortran08 compiler suites
      \end{itemize}
    \item Configure\\
      \texttt{cmake -DKokkos\_ROOT=/kokkos/path /interop/path}
  \end{itemize}
\end{frame}

\begin{frame}{What is Kokkos-Fortran-Interop?}
  \begin{itemize}
    \item Kokkos-Fortran offers wrappers around:
      \begin{itemize}
        \item \texttt{Kokkos::initialize(argc, argv)}
        \item \texttt{Kokkos::finalize()}
        \item \texttt{Kokkos::print\_configuration(output)}
        \item \texttt{Kokkos::View} 
        \item \texttt{Kokkos::DualView}
      \end{itemize}
    \item User kernels are written in C\texttt{++} $\rightarrow$ need to use
      \texttt{iso\_c\_binding}
    \item Only a subset of Kokkos capabilities are exposed
  \end{itemize}
\end{frame}

\begin{frame}{Starting a program}
  \begin{itemize}

>     \item Similar to MPI, Kokkos need to be initialized using

Reviewer: Make a comment that MPI needs to be initialized first?

Reviewer: Done

      \texttt{kokkos\_initialize()} and finalized using \texttt{kokkos\_finalize()}
    \item The \texttt{kokkos\_initialize()} subroutine initializes Kokkos and
      reads command line arguments
    \item \texttt{kokkos\_print\_configure("output.txt")} prints the
      Kokkos configuration to the file \texttt{output.txt}
  \end{itemize}
\end{frame}

\begin{frame}[containsverbatim]{Simple Example}
  \begin{minted}{fortran}
program my_kokkos_code
  use :: flcl_util_kokkos_mod

  ! Initialize Kokkos
  ! This subroutine reads command line arguments
  call kokkos_initialize()

  ! Print the configuration in a file
  call kokkos_print_configure('kokkos.out')

  ! Finalize Kokkos
  call kokkos_finalize()
end program my_kokkos_code
  \end{minted}
\end{frame}

\begin{frame}{Kokkos::View}
  \begin{itemize}
    \item \texttt{Kokkos::View} is Kokkos equivalent to an array

>     \item \texttt{Kokkos::View} can have up to 8 dimensions in C++ but they are

Reviewer: I think we only can do 6 dimensions in Kokkos 4 and only with Kokkos 5 using mdspan we supprt more. Maybe, I am wrong.

Author: The slide is correct
```
Views may have up to (at most) 8 dimensions and any number of these may be run-time or compile-time. 
```

Reviewer: Ok, we can keep it as it is.

      limited to 7 dimensions in Fortran
    \item Supported Fortran types: logical, 32-bit integer, 64-bit
      integer, 32-bit real, and 64-bit real
    \item Type follow the pattern \texttt{view\_TYPE\_DIM\_t}, e.g.,
      \texttt{view\_r64\_1d\_t} is a one-dimensional view of 64-bit real
  \end{itemize}
\end{frame}

\begin{frame}{Kokkos::View}
  \begin{itemize}
    \item The memory space defines where the memory is allocated
    \item Supported memory spaces: \texttt{Kokkos::HostSpace},
      \texttt{Kokkos::CudaManagedSpace}, and \texttt{Kokkos::HIPManagedSpace}
    \item The memory space is set when the \texttt{Kokkos-Fortran-Interop} is
      configured
  \end{itemize}
\end{frame}

\begin{frame}{Kokkos::View}
  \begin{itemize}
    \item \texttt{Kokkos::View} can be allocated directly or built from an
      array. In the latter case, the \texttt{Kokkos::View} can only be used on
      the host % I don't see the point of this

>     \item \texttt{Kokkos::View} that are allocated must also be deallocated

Reviewer: Maybe add using `kokkos_deallocate_view`?

\end{frame}

\begin{frame}[containsverbatim]{Kokkos::View}
  \begin{minted}{fortran}
use, intrinsic :: iso_c_binding
use :: flcl_mod

real(REAL64), pointer, dimension(:) :: c_y
type(view_r64_1d_t) :: v_c_y
integer :: mm = 5000

call kokkos_allocate_view(c_y, v_c_y, 'c_y', &
                          int(mm, c_size_t))

! Do stuff

call kokkos_deallocate_view(c_y, v_c_y)
  \end{minted}
\end{frame}

\begin{frame}{Kokkos::DualView}
  \begin{itemize}
    \item \texttt{Kokkos::DualView} are similar to \texttt{Kokkos::View} but
      they are composed of two \texttt{Kokkos::View}, one on the host and one on
      the device.
    \item It is the user's responsibility to synchronize the data
    \item Supported memory spaces: \texttt{Kokkos::HostSpace},
      \texttt{Kokkos::Cuda}, \texttt{Kokkos::HIP}, and \texttt{Kokkos::SYCL}
  \end{itemize}
\end{frame}

\begin{frame}[containsverbatim]{Kokkos::DualView}
  \begin{minted}{fortran}
use, intrinsic :: iso_c_binding
use :: flcl_mod

real(REAL64), pointer, dimension(:) :: c_y
type(dualview_r64_1d_t) :: v_c_y
integer :: mm = 5000

call kokkos_allocate_dualview(c_y, v_c_y, 'c_y', &
                              int(mm, c_size_t))

> ! Do stuff

Author: As far as I know, these functions do not exist in Fortran. You have to call them from C++

> ! Do stuff

Reviewer 2: Ok then let's make that explicit on the slide

call kokkos_deallocate_dualview(c_y, v_c_y)
  \end{minted}
\end{frame}

\begin{frame}{Kernel}
  \begin{itemize}
    \item Kernels using Kokkos are written in C++
    \item Use C-binding from Fortran standard 
    \item Create a subroutine that calls the C++ function
  \end{itemize}
\end{frame}

\begin{frame}[containsverbatim]{Initialize View}
  \begin{minted}{fortran}
use, intrinsic :: iso_c_binding
use :: flcl_mod

real(REAL64), pointer, dimension(:) :: c_y
type(view_r64_1d_t) :: v_c_y
integer :: mm = 5000

call kokkos_allocate_view(c_y, v_c_y, 'c_y', &
                          int(mm, c_size_t))

> call init_view(v_c_y)

Author: Why?

  \end{itemize}
\end{frame}

\begin{frame}{Starting a program}
  \begin{itemize}
    \item Similar to MPI, Kokkos need to be initialized using
      \texttt{kokkos\_initialize()} and finalized using \texttt{kokkos\_finalize()}
    \item The \texttt{kokkos\_initialize()} subroutine initializes Kokkos and
      reads command line arguments. It should be called after
      \texttt{MPI\_Initialize}
    \item \texttt{kokkos\_print\_configure("output.txt")} prints the
      Kokkos configuration to the file \texttt{output.txt}
  \end{itemize}
\end{frame}

\begin{frame}[containsverbatim]{Simple Example}
  \begin{minted}{fortran}
program my_kokkos_code
  use :: flcl_util_kokkos_mod

  ! Initialize Kokkos
  ! This subroutine reads command line arguments
  call kokkos_initialize()

  ! Print the configuration in a file
  call kokkos_print_configure('kokkos.out')

  ! Finalize Kokkos
  call kokkos_finalize()
end program my_kokkos_code
  \end{minted}
\end{frame}

\begin{frame}{Kokkos::View}
  \begin{itemize}
    \item \texttt{Kokkos::View} is Kokkos equivalent to an array
    \item \texttt{Kokkos::View} can have up to 8 dimensions in C++ but they are

>       limited to 7 dimensions in Fortran

Author: This is the maximum rank of a Kokkos::View not of a Fortran array. We do not allow people to create a Kokkos::View of rank 8 or higher in Fortran

>       limited to 7 dimensions in Fortran

Reviewer 3: Ok, but why not up to 8, then?

      \texttt{view\_r64\_1d\_t} is a one-dimensional view of 64-bit real
  \end{itemize}
\end{frame}

\begin{frame}{Kokkos::View}
  \begin{itemize}
    \item The memory space defines where the memory is allocated
    \item Supported memory spaces: \texttt{Kokkos::HostSpace},
      \texttt{Kokkos::CudaManagedSpace}, and \texttt{Kokkos::HIPManagedSpace}
    \item The memory space is set when the \texttt{Kokkos-Fortran-Interop} is
      configured
  \end{itemize}
\end{frame}

\begin{frame}{Kokkos::View}
  \begin{itemize}
    \item \texttt{Kokkos::View} can be allocated directly or built from an
      array. In the latter case, the \texttt{Kokkos::View} can only be used on
      the host % I don't see the point of this
    \item \texttt{Kokkos::View} that are allocated with
      \texttt{kokkos\_allocate\_view} must also be deallocated with
      \texttt{kokkos\_deallocate\_view}
    \item \texttt{Kokkos::View} cannot be accessed directly from Fortran instead
      it can be accessed through a \texttt{pointer}
  \end{itemize}
\end{frame}

\begin{frame}[containsverbatim]{Kokkos::View}
  \begin{minted}{fortran}
use, intrinsic :: iso_c_binding
use :: flcl_mod

> real(REAL64), pointer, dimension(:) :: c_y

Author: You need `c_y` if you want to "access" the View from the Fortran side directly. Otherwise, the only way to access the View is to go through C++

> real(REAL64), pointer, dimension(:) :: c_y

Reviewer 3: Then maybe add a comment for this (and an example).

    use, intrinsic :: iso_fortran_env
    use :: flcl_mod
    implicit none
    public
      interface
        subroutine my_f_init( y ) &
          & bind(c, name='my_c_init')
          use, intrinsic :: iso_c_binding
          use :: flcl_mod
          type(c_ptr), intent(in) :: y
        end subroutine my_f_init
      end interface
  \end{minted}
\end{frame}

\begin{frame}[containsverbatim]{Initialize View}
  \begin{minted}{fortran}
      contains

        subroutine init_view( y )
          use, intrinsic :: iso_c_binding
          use :: flcl_mod
          implicit none
          type(view_r64_1d_t), intent(inout) :: y

          call my_f_init(y%ptr())

        end subroutine init_view
  
end module init_f_mod
  \end{minted}
\end{frame}

\begin{frame}[containsverbatim]{Initialize View}
  \begin{minted}{C++}
#include <Kokkos_Core.hpp>
#include <flcl-cxx.hpp>
using view_type = flcl::view_r64_1d_t;

extern "C" {
  void my_c_init(view_type **v_y) {
    view_type y = **v_y;
    Kokkos::parallel_for("init", y.extent(0), 
        KOKKOS_LAMBDA(int idx) {
      y(idx) += idx;
    });
    Kokkos::fence();
  }
}
  \end{minted}
\end{frame}

\begin{frame}{Exercise}

>   Use \texttt{Kokkos::View} to do an \emph{axpy}

Author: > I'd suggest to give more directions for the exercise:

The directions are in the exercise files.

      \texttt{kokkos\_allocate\_view} must also be deallocated with
      \texttt{kokkos\_deallocate\_view}
    \item \texttt{kokkos\_allocate\_view} initializes all the elements of the
      \texttt{Kokkos::View} to zero
    \item \texttt{Kokkos::View} cannot be accessed directly from Fortran instead
      it can be accessed through a \texttt{pointer}
  \end{itemize}
\end{frame}

\begin{frame}[containsverbatim]{Kokkos::View}
  \begin{minted}{fortran}
use, intrinsic :: iso_c_binding
use :: flcl_mod

! Kokkos View only accessible from C++
type(view_r64_1d_t) :: v_c_y
! Pointer to access the Kokkos View from Fortran
real(real64), pointer, dimension(:) :: c_y
integer :: mm = 5000

call kokkos_allocate_view(c_y, v_c_y, 'c_y', &
                          int(mm, c_size_t))

! Do stuff

call kokkos_deallocate_view(c_y, v_c_y)
  \end{minted}
\end{frame}

\begin{frame}{Kokkos::DualView}
  \begin{itemize}
    \item \texttt{Kokkos::DualView} are similar to \texttt{Kokkos::View} but
      they are composed of two \texttt{Kokkos::View}, one on the host and one on
      the device.
    \item It is the user's responsibility to synchronize the data

>     \item The synchronization must done in C++

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    \item The synchronization must be done in C++
```

    \item Supported memory spaces: \texttt{Kokkos::HostSpace},

>       \texttt{Kokkos::Cuda}, \texttt{Kokkos::HIP}, and \texttt{Kokkos::SYCL}

Author: It's not a repetition. Views use a SharedSpace, DualView don't.

type(dualview_r64_1d_t) :: v_c_y
integer :: mm = 5000

call kokkos_allocate_dualview(c_y, v_c_y, 'c_y', &
                              int(mm, c_size_t))

! Do stuff

call kokkos_deallocate_dualview(c_y, v_c_y)
  \end{minted}
\end{frame}

\begin{frame}{Kernel}
  \begin{itemize}
    \item Kernels using Kokkos are written in C++
    \item Use C-binding from Fortran standard 
    \item Create a subroutine that calls the C++ function
  \end{itemize}
\end{frame}

\begin{frame}[containsverbatim]{Initialize View}
  \begin{minted}{fortran}
use, intrinsic :: iso_c_binding
use :: flcl_mod
use :: my_init_mod

real(real64), pointer, dimension(:) :: c_y
type(view_r64_1d_t) :: v_c_y
integer :: mm = 5000

call kokkos_allocate_view(c_y, v_c_y, 'c_y', &
                          int(mm, c_size_t))

call my_init(v_c_y)

call kokkos_deallocate_view(c_y, v_c_y)
  \end{minted}
\end{frame}

\begin{frame}[containsverbatim]{Initialize View}
  \begin{minted}{fortran}
module my_init_mod
    use, intrinsic :: iso_c_binding
    use, intrinsic :: iso_fortran_env
    use :: flcl_mod
    implicit none
    public
      interface
        subroutine my_f_init( y ) &
          & bind(c, name='my_c_init')

>           type(c_ptr), intent(in) :: y

Author: Just making sure, we want `import` and nothing else?

\input{KokkosTutorial_PreTitle}

\title{Kokkos-Fortran-Interop}

\input{KokkosTutorial_PostTitle}

\usepackage{minted}

\begin{document}

\begin{frame}
	\titlepage
\end{frame}

\begin{frame}{Installation}
  \begin{itemize}
    \item Repository: \url{https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos-fortran-interop}
    \item Requirements:
      \begin{itemize}
        \item Kokkos 4.0 or newer
        \item C++17/Fortran08 compiler suites
      \end{itemize}
    \item Configure\\
      \texttt{cmake -DKokkos\_ROOT=/kokkos/path /interop/path}
  \end{itemize}
\end{frame}

\begin{frame}{What is Kokkos-Fortran-Interop?}
  \begin{itemize}
    \item Kokkos-Fortran offers wrappers around:
      \begin{itemize}
        \item \texttt{Kokkos::initialize(argc, argv)}
        \item \texttt{Kokkos::finalize()}
        \item \texttt{Kokkos::print\_configuration(output)}
        \item \texttt{Kokkos::View} 
        \item \texttt{Kokkos::DualView}
      \end{itemize}
    \item User kernels are written in C\texttt{++} $\rightarrow$ need to use
      \texttt{iso\_c\_binding}
    \item Only a subset of Kokkos capabilities are exposed
  \end{itemize}
\end{frame}

\begin{frame}{Starting a program}
  \begin{itemize}

>     \item Similar to MPI, Kokkos need to be initialized using
>       \texttt{kokkos\_initialize()} and finalized using \texttt{kokkos\_finalize()}
>     \item The \texttt{kokkos\_initialize()} subroutine initializes Kokkos and
>       reads command line arguments. It should be called after
>       \texttt{MPI\_Initialize}

Reviewer 3: I'm being pedantic, but subroutines without arguments don't need the parentheses (like you did for MPI). Plus, it's better to use the "call" verb on them.

```suggestion
    \item Similar to MPI, Kokkos need to be initialized by calling
      \texttt{kokkos\_initialize} and finalized by calling  \texttt{kokkos\_finalize}
    \item The \texttt{kokkos\_initialize} subroutine initializes Kokkos and
      reads command line arguments. It should be called after
      \texttt{MPI\_Initialize}
```

  call kokkos_initialize()

  ! Print the configuration in a file
  call kokkos_print_configure('kokkos.out')

  ! Finalize Kokkos
  call kokkos_finalize()
end program my_kokkos_code
  \end{minted}
\end{frame}

\begin{frame}{Kokkos::View}
  \begin{itemize}
    \item \texttt{Kokkos::View} is Kokkos equivalent to an array
    \item \texttt{Kokkos::View} can have up to 8 dimensions in C++ but they are
      limited to 7 dimensions in Fortran due to limitation of the library
    \item Supported Fortran types: logical, 32-bit integer, 64-bit
      integer, 32-bit real, 64-bit real, 32-bit complex, 64-bit complex, and
      index (positive 64-bit integer)
    \item Types follow the pattern \texttt{view\_<type>\_<dimension>\_t}, e.g.,
      \texttt{view\_r64\_1d\_t} is a one-dimensional view of 64-bit real
  \end{itemize}
\end{frame}

\begin{frame}{Kokkos::View}
  \begin{itemize}
    \item The memory space defines where the memory is allocated
    \item Supported memory spaces: \texttt{Kokkos::HostSpace},
      \texttt{Kokkos::CudaManagedSpace}, and \texttt{Kokkos::HIPManagedSpace}
    \item The memory space is set when the \texttt{Kokkos-Fortran-Interop} is

>       configured

Reviewer 3: I'm not sure to understand how to use memory spaces. Is it exposed in `kokkos_initialize`?

Author: I'll rework the bullet point but basically, you cannot choose the memory space. We look at what memory space are available (depending on how Kokkos was configure) and  we choose one.

Reviewer 3: Ok, I get it. Yeah, you should rephrase it to tell that the user doesn't have control over the memory space.

    \item The synchronization must done in C++
    \item Supported memory spaces: \texttt{Kokkos::HostSpace},
      \texttt{Kokkos::Cuda}, \texttt{Kokkos::HIP}, and \texttt{Kokkos::SYCL}
    \item \texttt{Kokkos::DualView} cannot be accessed directly from Fortran instead
      it can be accessed through a \texttt{pointer}
  \end{itemize}
\end{frame}

\begin{frame}[containsverbatim]{Kokkos::DualView}
  \begin{minted}{fortran}
use, intrinsic :: iso_c_binding
use :: flcl_mod, only : dualview_r64_1d_t, kokkos_allocate_dualview,
    kokkos_deallocate_dualview

real(real64), pointer, dimension(:) :: c_y
type(dualview_r64_1d_t) :: v_c_y
integer :: mm = 5000

call kokkos_allocate_dualview(c_y, v_c_y, 'c_y', &
                              int(mm, c_size_t))

! Do stuff

call kokkos_deallocate_dualview(c_y, v_c_y)
  \end{minted}
\end{frame}

\begin{frame}{Kernel}
  \begin{itemize}
    \item Kernels using Kokkos are written in C++
    \item Use C-binding from Fortran standard 
    \item Create a subroutine that calls the C++ function
  \end{itemize}
\end{frame}

\begin{frame}[containsverbatim]{Initialize View}
  \begin{minted}{fortran}
use, intrinsic :: iso_c_binding

> use :: flcl_mod

Reviewer 3: You need to add

```fortran
use :: my_init_mod
```

real(real64), pointer, dimension(:) :: c_y
type(view_r64_1d_t) :: v_c_y
integer :: mm = 5000

call kokkos_allocate_view(c_y, v_c_y, 'c_y', &
                          int(mm, c_size_t))

call init_view(v_c_y)

call kokkos_deallocate_view(c_y, v_c_y)
  \end{minted}
\end{frame}

\begin{frame}[containsverbatim]{Initialize View}
  \begin{minted}{fortran}
module init_f_mod
    use, intrinsic :: iso_c_binding
    use, intrinsic :: iso_fortran_env
    use :: flcl_mod
    implicit none
    public
      interface
        subroutine my_f_init( y ) &
          & bind(c, name='my_c_init')
          type(c_ptr), intent(in) :: y
        end subroutine my_f_init
      end interface
  \end{minted}
\end{frame}

\begin{frame}[containsverbatim]{Initialize View}
  \begin{minted}{fortran}
      contains

>         subroutine init_view( y )

Reviewer 3: I'd name it `my_init`.

          use, intrinsic :: iso_c_binding
          use :: flcl_mod
          implicit none
          type(view_r64_1d_t), intent(inout) :: y

          call my_f_init(y%ptr())

        end subroutine init_view
  

> end module init_f_mod

Reviewer 3: I'd name it `my_init` and `my_init_mod`.
